Welcome back.
Are you ready to learn more modeling
tools for business analytics?
Great, because here in this module,
we're going to take a look at the role
of the uncertainty in business problems.
And we're also going to show how to create
models that can be used to measure risk.
There are two types of uncertainty.
In the first one, all possible outcomes
are known, and the probability for
each outcome is either known or
can be estimated.
For example, when you roll a die, you know
that there are six possible outcomes.
And if the die is fair, each outcome
has the same probability of occurring.
Prior to the roll, we know the number of
outcomes, we know what the outcomes are,
and we know that the probability
of each outcome is one sixth.
In the second type of uncertainty,
we don't know the probabilities
of the outcomes.
And in fact, we might not even know
what the possible outcomes are.
In other words,
there is total uncertainty, in the sense
that there is nothing measurable.
For example, it is very difficult
to assess the probability that
an idea becomes a successful business.
This is a very complex problem that
depends on way too many factors and
sources of uncertainty.
And this is why you often hear that
successful entrepreneurs are not the ones
that have one great idea, but
actually the ones that have lots of ideas.
In risk analysis, we are interested
in the first type of uncertainty.
That is, the one for
which we either know or
we can estimate the probability
of each outcome.
The reason is simple, this type of
uncertainty is the one that we can
measure, and therefore we're able
to create models to assess risk.
These models take into
consideration that some
elements are not known with certainty.
For instance, let's consider profit,
which is probably the most fundamental
mathematical model in business.
Profit is calculated as the difference
between revenue and cost.
Let's suppose that we know exactly
how much everything is going to cost
to make a unit of a product
that we want to sell.
It's not a very realistic assumption,
but let's just go with it.
To make it simple, we're also going
to assume that the single source of
revenue for this business is what we
collect from the selling of this product.
If we're the ones determining
the price of the product,
then all we need to do to
calculate profit is to multiply
the number of units sold by the price per
unit, and then subtract all the cost.
Calculating profit is very simple once
we know how many units we have sold.
But if we want to do some planning based
on future revenues, then things get a bit
more complicated, because we need
to be able to estimate demand.
If we take a very simplistic approach,
we might just say that demand
is going to stay steady, and
therefore we will estimate
future demand with just the average
demand that we have observed so far.
And this could work well in environments
where things don't change much.
The reality is that in most situations,
things don't stay exactly the same
from one period to another.
We must consider variability, and
it is precisely this variability,
the one that produces uncertainty.
What we want the models to be
able to capture is uncertainty
that is related to elements that
include some level of randomness.
We want to extract historical patterns
that can help us assess risk.
As we mentioned earlier, the key is to
be able to determine all outcomes and
the probabilities.
For example, would you invest in
a stock that is expected to double its
price within a year?
Well this seems like
a pretty good opportunity.
But the key word here is expected.
Expected values don't tell you anything
about the range of outcomes and
their probabilities.
With this limited information we
simply don't know what the risk is.
Decisions involve risk and
attitudes toward risk vary
from one person to another.
Some can tolerate more, and some less.
But we all need to have a way of
measuring the amount of risk involved.
Risk analysis can be done at
several levels of complexity.
At the very basic level, we could do
a best case, worst case analysis.
Let's suppose that we have a spread sheet
model in which some cells represent data
with uncertainty.
For example, we could have some cells
that represent uncertain demand.
For the base case, we plug in the most
optimistic values in each of these cells.
We can then see what happens
to the outcome cell.
In the worst case scenario,
we plug in the most pessimistic values for
the uncertain cells.
And once again,
we check what happens to the output cells.
This is easy to do, but it doesn't give
us information about the distribution of
all possible outcomes between the best and
the worst cases.
Take a look at these distributions of
values between the best and the worst.
All of these distributions have
the same best and worst outcomes, and
even the same average outcome, but
they certainly don't look alike.
The bell shape distribution tells us that
the average is the most likely outcome,
and the values deviate above and below
the average with the same probability.
The distribution in the form of a U tells
us that the average almost never happens
and that it's as likely to get the worst
possible outcome as it is to get the best.
Most people would associate this
distribution to a risky situation.
The other two distributions have
long tails indicating that extreme
values do not happen often, but they
could happen with a small probability.
These distributions illustrate
that examining only the best and
the worst possible outcomes is
a limited analysis that ignores
a lot of valuable information.
You now might be wondering well,
then how can we get the values in
between the best and the worst?
And the answer is Monte Carlo Simulation,
a predictive analytics tool.
The name of this methodology comes
from the famous casino in Monaco, and
it has a very interesting story that
dates back to the experiments that took
place during the development
of the atomic bomb.
Here of course,
we are going to focus on a more
peaceful application of this technique.
And easy way of describing how Monte
Carlo Simulation works, is by assuming
that we have expression model in which
some of the cells contain certain values.
For example, suppose that the green cells
are the ones with the uncertain values,
and that the orange cell is the outcome.
For most models,
if we use expected values for
the green cells, we obtain an expected
value for the orange cell.
We can also plug in the worst and the best
estimates for the green cells, and
observe the best and
the worst estimates for the orange cell.
In general, any set of values for
the green cells generates a value for
the orange cell.
This is known as what-if analysis.
If we plug in a lot of values for
the green cells, and
then store all the resulting values for
the orange cell, we could create
a picture of all possible outcomes.
This picture is what we have
been calling a distribution.
Plugging in a lot of numbers to create
a distribution is very tedious,
and not only that, if we are the ones
choosing these input values,
we're bound to introduce our
own biases in the process.
And this is why we use
Monte Carlo Simulation.
The method requires that
we make assumptions about
how the values of
the uncertain cells behave.
For instance, do the uncertain values
follow a uniform distribution?
Or a normal distribution?
We will see that these assumptions
are typically based on both experience and
historical data.
The quality of the model will depend on
how reasonable these assumptions are.
But once we feel comfortable with the
assumptions about the uncertain values,
the method will produce valuable
information about the outcomes.
It is really exciting that, thanks to
advances in personal computing and
software, we get to use a tool that,
not long ago,
was only available to those with advanced
programming skills and powerful computers.